---
layout: post
title:  "Clojurescript's areduce is faster than native javascript's reduce"
description:  "Clojurescript's areduce is faster than native javascript's reduce"
date:   2016-04-04 07:12:36 +0200
categories: clojurescript
thumbnail: assets/klipse.png
guid: "BD766B6E-CD38-4B24-BCA6-AF506B21AE1A"
author: "@viebel"
---


## Power of expression vs. Performances

`map` and `reduce` are the basic building blocks of functional programming.

The essence of `map` and `reduce` is that they give you - the developer - more power of expression over the equivalent piece of code using a `while` or a `for` loop.

And the power of expression is an important part of SW development.

But very often, there is a trade-off between power of expression and performances.
It's the case with `reduce` in `javascript`.
But, fortunately, `Clojurescript` comes to the rescue with its **super-powerful macros** and we - the clojurescript developers - enjoy both high performances an the power of expression.

In this article, we show illustrate this idea dealing with a function that calculates the sum of the squares of an array of numbers.

## javascript: reduce vs. for loop

Let's compare the performaces of `reduce` and `for` for `sum-of-squares`, with [KLIPSE][app-url-js]{:target="_blank"}.

We are using `js*` to embedd `javascript` code into `clojurescript`.


First, the `for` loop:

~~~klipse
(def n 1000000)
(def js-arr (to-array (range n)))

(defn sum-of-squares-reduce-js [arr]
  (js* "arr.reduce(function(res, val) {return res + val * val;}, 0)"))


(with-out-str 
(time (sum-of-squares-reduce-js js-arr)))
~~~

`reduce` in javascript has really bad performaces vs. the `for` loop: 

~~~klipse
(defn sum-of-squares-for-js [arr]
  (js* 
      "var res=0;
           for(var i=0; i < arr.length; i++){
                      res = res + arr[i] * arr[i];
                           }")
    (js* "res"))

(with-out-str 
     (time (sum-of-squares-for-js js-arr)))

~~~


> In `javascript`, `reduce` is much slower than `for`.

Feel free to modify `js-arr` and press `Ctrl-Enter` a couple of times to benchmark as you wish.


## Clojurescript areduce

In clojure and clojurescript there is a handy way to reduce over native arrays.

Please welcome [areduce](https://clojuredocs.org/clojure.core/areduce){:target="_blank"}.

With `areduce` you pass an expression instead of a function

~~~clojure
(areduce a idx ret init expr)
~~~
> `areduce` reduces an expression across an array `a`, using an index named `idx`, and return value named `ret`, initialized to `init`, setting `ret` to the evaluation of `expr` at each step, returning `ret`.

Obviously, `areduce` is a macro.

It sounds complex, but with an example it will be very clear.
Let's implement our sum of squares using `areduce` and have a look at the transpiled `javascript` code:

~~~klipse-js
(defn sum-of-squares-clj-areduce [xs]
  (areduce xs i ret 0
             (+ ret (* (aget xs i) (aget xs i)))))
~~~

Observe the transpiled `javascript` code: It's very close to the implementation, you'd have written for `sum-of-squares`, before `reduce` was available in `javascript`.
(Maybe you'd chosen better names for the variables.)

From the power of expression perspective, `areduce` is as powerful are `reduce`.

We will investigate the performance of `areduce` in the next paragraph.


## Clojurescript areduce vs. Javascript reduce

Now, it's obvious why `areduce` is faster that `javascript`'s `reduce`: `areduce` is a macro that allows you - the developer - to write elegant code that is translated at compile time to fast native code.


Let's see it in action with [KLIPSE][app-url-js]{:target="_blank"}.

~~~klipse

(defn sum-of-squares-clj-areduce [xs]
  (areduce xs i ret 0
             (+ ret (* (aget xs i) (aget xs i)))))

(with-out-str 
 (time (sum-of-squares-clj-areduce js-arr)))

~~~


> In `clojurescript`, `areduce` is as fast as `for` in `javascript`



Clojurescript rocks!


[app-url-js]: http://app.klipse.tech?js_only=1

